circular_id: RBI-BASE-2025-002
title: Mule Account KYC and AML Monitoring Advisory
category: KYC / AML / Mule Account Monitoring
issue_date: 2025-07-10
regulator: Reserve Bank of India
effective_from: 2025-08-01

The Reserve Bank of India advises banks to strengthen baseline controls for mule account identification, enhanced KYC review, AML monitoring, and branch-level escalation of suspicious account activity. This advisory is intended to help banks detect accounts used as pass-through channels for fraud proceeds, unusual transaction velocity, or rapid beneficiary churn.

Banks must maintain transaction monitoring scenarios for accounts that show sudden cash-out behaviour, high-frequency inward credits followed by immediate withdrawals, repeated use of newly added beneficiaries, unusual device or IP overlap, and account activity inconsistent with the stated customer profile. Fraud Risk Department, KYC / AML Compliance, and Branch Operations should jointly review mule account alerts generated by core banking, AML systems, and digital channel monitoring tools.

Banks should conduct enhanced KYC verification for accounts flagged as suspected mule accounts. The review should include customer identity information, occupation and income profile, recent address or mobile changes, linked account relationships, beneficial owner details where applicable, and prior suspicious transaction reports. Branch Operations should contact the customer where appropriate and record the outcome in the KYC review tracker.

Suspicious mule account cases must be escalated to the KYC / AML Compliance team for review. The team should decide whether to freeze activity, file a suspicious transaction report, monitor the account, or close the case with documented justification. Cases involving digital fraud proceeds should also be shared with the Fraud Risk Department for recovery and customer impact assessment.

Banks must preserve mule account alert records, KYC documents, escalation notes, account freeze approvals, suspicious transaction review notes, and branch customer contact proof for audit. Monthly review of unresolved mule account alerts should be presented to the Compliance Office and Risk Management. This baseline advisory does not mandate daily branch escalation packs, device-overlap scoring, or regulator-ready weekly evidence bundles unless a later RBI circular introduces those requirements.
